post_drafts/2018-4-19-weekly-planning.md, before:

---
layout: post
title: My Weekly Planning
permalink: /weekly-planning/
---

I know what you're thinking. This guy is going to tell me I've been planning my week all wrong and that he has some "secret sauce" that will make me 1000x more productive... Well, I won't. If you find that secret sauce, let me know. 

It's been my experience that effective planning can be as different as the people that are doing it. I've just found a system that works for me in my career as a software engineer. Feel free to cherry pick anything from my experience that you feel may help, but make it your own.

Every Friday afternoon, when there doesn't seem to be a lot going on, I block out an hour of my time to plan the upcoming week. It almost never takes that long, but it's nice to have the time blocked out if I do need it.

### Tools: Trello, Pomello, Google Calendar, OneNote

[Trello](https://trello.com/) is my go-to for task tracking. I have 3 different boards:

- Work
- Personal
- Learning

Obviously, my Work board keeps track of well... Work. Anything related to tasks I need to get done at work are in this board. I know a lot of software teams use different tools like JIRA or VSTS, and being employed at Microsoft, of course my team uses VSTS. But luckily, my manager handles most of our time tracking in VSTS at a daily level of granularity. Most of the time, our work items are more general, like "Create a Spark pipeline for X," rather than "". 

I've experimented with several different styles of lists, such as the traditional "To-Do," "Doing," and "Done." I find that it works great for team projects/backlogs, but when it makes it hard to plan for a week.

The list layout I'm using now was taken from [John Sonmez's video on weekly planning](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9k0OhJkjQ0), where he has a list for Today, a list for Completed, a list for each day of the week, a list for Next Week, a list for Later. I added a list

Commit message:

add more projects, continue working on blog post for weekly planning

post_drafts/2018-4-19-weekly-planning.md, after:

---
layout: post
title: My Weekly Planning
permalink: /weekly-planning/
---

I know what you're thinking. This guy is going to tell me I've been planning my week all wrong and that he has some "secret sauce" that will make me 1000x more productive... Well, I won't. If you find that secret sauce, let me know. 

It's been my experience that effective planning can be as different as the people that are doing it. I've just found a system that works for me in my career as a software engineer. Feel free to cherry pick anything from my experience that you feel may help, but make it your own.

Every Friday afternoon, when there doesn't seem to be a lot going on, I block out an hour of my time to plan the upcoming week. It almost never takes that long, but it's nice to have the time blocked out if I do need it.

## Planning Tool: [Trello](https://trello.com/)

Trello is my go-to for task tracking. I have 3 different boards:

- Work
- Personal
- Learning

Obviously, my Work board keeps track of well... Work. Anything related to tasks I need to get done at work are in this board. I know a lot of software teams use different tools like JIRA or VSTS, and being employed at Microsoft, of course my team uses VSTS. But luckily, my manager handles most of our time tracking in VSTS at a daily level of granularity. Most of the time, our work items are more general, like "Create a Spark pipeline for X," rather than fixing a specific bug. 

For my Trello boards, I've experimented with several different styles of lists, such as the traditional **To-Do**, **Doing**, and **Done**. I find that it works great for team projects/backlogs, but when it makes it hard to plan for a week.

The list layout I'm using now was mostly taken from [John Sonmez's video on weekly planning](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W9k0OhJkjQ0), where he has a list for **Today**, a list for **Completed**, a list for **each day of the week**, a list for **This Week**, **Next Week**, and a list for **Later**. 

On Friday afternoon, I sit down and look at the list of tasks I have for the coming week and schedule them for a certain day of the week by moving their card into that list.

Here's where it gets a little more interesting. I wrote a C# script that runs every morning at 1:00 AM to move things around in my lists (each day's cards -> **Today**, **Next Week** -> **This Week** on Sunday morning, etc.). It may be a little overkill, but it wasn't hard and I can't help but write code. I have the Trello mobile app on my Android phone with a widget for my **Today** list on my home screen. So rather than seeing notification badges for how many likes my latest Insta post just got, I am looking at exactly what I have planned to do for that day.

## Scheduling Tool: [Google Calendar](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/r)

## Time-Boxing Tool: [Pomello](https://pomelloapp.com/)
